We have now finished our discussion of channel allocation protocols in the abstract, so it is time to see how these principles
apply to real systems. Many of the designs for personal, local, and metropolitan area networks have been standardized under the
name of IEEE 802. A few have survived but many have not. The most important of the survivors are 802.3 (Ethernet) and 802.11 (wireless LAN).
Bluetooth (wireless PAN) is widely deployed but has now been standardized outside of 802.15.

We will begin our study of real systems with Ethernet, probably the most ubiquitous kind of computer network in the world. Two kinds
of Ethernet exist: classic Ethernet , which solves the multiple access problem using the techniques we have studied in this chapter;
and switched Ethernet , in which devices called switches are used to connect different computers. It is important to note that,
while they are both referred to as Ethernet, they are quite different. In practice, only switched Ethernet is used nowadays.

--- CLASSIC ETHERNET, PHYSICAL LAYER
Classic Ethernet snaked around the building as a single long cable to which all the computers were attached. Each version (thick, think, ...)
of Ethernet has a maximum cable length per segment (i.e., unamplified length) over which the signal will propagate. To allow larger
networks, multiple cables can be connected by repeaters. A repeater is a physical layer device that receives, amplifies (i.e.,
regenerates), and retransmits signals in both directions. As far as the software is concerned, a series of cable segments connected
by repeaters is no different from a single cable (except for a small amount of delay introduced by the repeaters). An Ethernet could
contain multiple cable segments and multiple repeaters, but no two transceivers (ricetrasmettitori, dove colleghi i computer al cavo)
could be more than 2.5 km apart and no path between any two transceivers could traverse more than four repeaters. The reason for
this restriction was that the MAC protocol, which we will look at next, would work correctly.

- CLASSIC ETHERNET MAC SUBLAYER PROTOCOL
The format used to send frames is shown in Fig. 4-14.

- First comes a Preamble of 8 bytes, each containing the bit pattern 10101010 (with the exception of the last byte, in which the
last 2 bits are set to 11). This last byte is called the Start of Frame delimiter for 802.3. The last two 1 bits tell the receiver
that the rest of the frame is about to start.

- Next come two addresses, one for the destination and one for the source. They are each 6 bytes long.
    The first transmitted bit of the destination address is a 0 for ordinary addresses and a 1 for group addresses. Group addresses
allow multiple stations to listen to a single address. When a frame is sent to a group address, all the stations in the group
receive it. Sending to a group of stations is called MULTICASTING. The special address consisting of all 1 bits is reserved for
BROADCASTING. A frame containing all 1s in the destination field is accepted by all stations on the network. Multicasting is more
selective, but it involves group management to define which stations are in the group. Conversely, broadcasting does not
differentiate between stations at all, so it does not require any group management.

An interesting feature of station source addresses is that they are globally unique, assigned centrally by IEEE to ensure that no
two stations anywhere in the world have the same address. The idea is that any station can uniquely address any other station by 
just giving the right 48-bit number. To do this, the first 3 bytes of the address field are used for an OUI (Organizationally Unique
Identifier). Values for this field are assigned by IEEE and indicate a manufacturer. Manufacturers are assigned blocks of 2^24
addresses. The manufacturer assigns the last 3 bytes of the address and programs the complete address into the NIC  (Network 
Interface Card, la scheda di rete) before it is sold. 

- Next comes the Type or Length field, depending on whether the frame is Ethernet or IEEE 802.3.
    Ethernet uses a Type field to tell the receiver what to do with the frame. Multiple network-layer protocols may be in use at
the same time on the same machine, so when an Ethernet frame arrives, the operating system has to know which one to hand the frame
to. The Type field specifies which process to give the frame to. For example, a type code of 0x0800 means that the data contains an
IPv4 packet.

IEEE 802.3, in its wisdom, decided that this field would carry the length of the frame, since the Ethernet type was determined
by looking inside the data, a layering violation if ever there was one. Of course, this meant there was no way for the receiver
to figure out what to do with an incoming frame. That problem was handled by the addition of another header for the logical link
control (LLC) protocol within the data, which we will look at later.

Unfortunately, by the time 802.3 was published, so much hardware and software for DIX Ethernet was already in use that few
manufacturers and users were enthusiastic about repackaging the Type and Length fields. In 1997, IEEE threw in the towel and said
that both ways were fine with it. Fortunately, all the Type fields in use before 1997 had values greater than 1500, then well
established as the maximum data size. Now the rule is that any number there less than or equal to 0x600 (1536) can be interpreted 
as Length, and any number greater than 0x600 can be interpreted as Type. Now IEEE can maintain that everyone is using its standard
and everybody else can keep on doing what they were already doing (not bothering with logical link control protocol). This is what
happens when (industrial) politics meets technology. 

- Next come the data, up to 1500 bytes. This limit was chosen somewhat arbitrarily at the time the Ethernet standard was cast in
stone, mostly based on the fact that a transceiver needs enough RAM to hold an entire frame and RAM was expensive in 1978. A larger
upper limit would have meant more RAM, and hence a more expensive transceiver. 

In addition to there being a maximum frame length, there is also a minimum frame length. The reason for having a minimum length
frame is to prevent a station from completing the transmission of a short frame before the first bit has even reached the far end
of the cable, where it may collide with another frame. If the data portion of a frame is less than 46 bytes, the Pad field is used
to fill out the frame to the minimum size. 

If a station tries to transmit a very short frame, it is conceivable that a collision will occur, but the transmission will have
completed before the noise burst gets back to the station at. The sender will then incorrectly conclude that the frame was
successfully sent. To prevent this situation from occurring, all frames must take more than 2*tao to send. so that the transmission
is still taking place when the noise burst gets back to the sender.

- The final field is the Checksum. It is a 32-bit CRC. This CRC is an error-detecting code that is used to determine if the bits
of the frame have been received correctly. It just does error detection, with the frame dropped if an error is detected.

- CSMA/CD with Binary Exponential Backoff
Classic Ethernet uses the 1-persistent CSMA/CD algorithm that we studied. This means that stations sense the medium when they have
a frame to send and send the frame as soon as the medium becomes idle. They monitor the channel for collisions as they send. If
there is a collision, they abort the transmission with a short jam signal and retransmit after a random interval.

Let us now see how the random interval is determined when a collision occurs, as it is a new method. After a collision, time is
divided into discrete slots whose length is equal to the worst-case round-trip propagation time on the ether (2*tao). After the
first collision, each station waits either 0 or 1 slot times at random before trying again. If two stations collide and each one
picks the same random number, they will collide again. After the second collision, each one picks either 0, 1, 2, or 3 at random
and waits that number of slot times. If a third collision occurs (the probability of this happening is 0.25), the next time the
number of slots to wait is chosen at random from the interval 0 to 2^3-1. In general, after i collisions, a random number between
0 and 2 i < 1 is chosen, and that number of slots is skipped.

This algorithm, called binary exponential backoff, was chosen to dynamically adapt to the number of stations trying to send. If the
randomization interval for all collisions were 1023, the chance of two stations colliding for a second time would be negligible, but
the average wait after a collision would be hundreds of slot times, introducing significant delay. On the other hand, if each 
station always delayed for either 0 or 1 slots, then if 100 stations ever tried to send at once they would collide over and over
until 99 of them picked 1 and the remaining station picked 0. This might take years. By having the randomization interval grow 
exponentially as more and more consecutive collisions occur, the algorithm ensures a low delay when only a few stations collide but
also ensures that the collisions are resolved in a reasonable interval when many stations collide.

If there is no collision, the sender assumes that the frame was probably successfully delivered. That is, neither CSMA/CD nor
Ethernet provides acknowledgements. This choice is appropriate for wired and optical fiber channels that have low error rates. Any
errors that do occur must then be detected by the CRC and recovered by higher layers. For wireless channels that have more errors, 
we will see that acknowledgements are used. In altri termini Ethernet è CONNECTIONLESS e UNRELIABLE.

--- SWITCHED ETHERNET
Ethernet soon began to evolve away from the single long cable architecture of classic Ethernet. The problems associated with
finding breaks or loose connections drove it toward a different kind of wiring pattern, in which each station has a dedicated
cable running to a central hub. A HUB simply connects all the attached wires electrically, as if they were soldered together.
Adding or removing a station is simpler in this configuration, and cable breaks can be detected easily.

However, hubs do not increase capacity because they are logically equivalent to the single long cable of classic Ethernet (stesso
dominio  di collisione). As more and more stations are added, each station gets a decreasing share of the fixed capacity (non devo
sovrappormi  ad altri). Eventually, the LAN will saturate. One way out is to go to a higher speed, say, from 10 Mbps to 100 Mbps,
1 Gbps, or even higher speeds. But with the growth of multimedia and powerful servers, even a 1-Gbps Ethernet can become saturated. 

Fortunately, there is an another way to deal with increased load: switched Ethernet. The heart of this system is a SWITCH containing
a high-speed backplane that connects all of the ports. From the outside, a switch looks just like a hub. They are both boxes,
typically with 4 to 48 ports, each with a standard RJ-45 connector for a twisted-pair cable. Each cable connects the switch or hub
to a single computer. A switch has the same advantages as a hub, too. It is easy to add or remove a new station by plugging or
unplugging a wire, and it is easy to find most faults since a flaky cable or port will usually affect just one station. There is
still a shared component that can fail, the switch itself, but if all stations lose connectivity the IT folks know what to do to
fix the problem: replace the whole switch. 

Inside the switch, however, something very different is happening. Switches only output frames to the ports for which those frames
are destined. When a switch port receives an Ethernet frame from a station, the switch checks the Ethernet addresses to see which
port the frame is destined for. This step requires the switch to be able to work out which ports correspond to which addresses, a
process that we will describe later when we get to the general case of switches connected to other switches. For now, just assume
that the switch knows the frame’s destination port. The switch then forwards the frame over its high-speed backplane to the
destination port. The destination port then transmits the frame on the wire so that it reaches the intended station. NONE of the
other ports even knows the frame exists. 

What happens if more than one of the stations or ports wants to send a frame at the same time? Again, switches differ from hubs.
In a hub, all stations are in the same collision domain. They must use the CSMA/CD algorithm to schedule their transmissions. In a
switch, each port is its own independent collision domain. In the common case that the cable is full duplex, both the station and
the port can send a frame on the cable at the same time, without worrying about other ports and stations. Collisions are now
impossible and CSMA/CD is not needed. However, if the cable is half duplex, the station and the port must contend for transmission
with CSMA/CD in the usual way.

A switch improves performance over a hub in two ways. First, since there are no collisions, the capacity is used more efficiently.
Second, and more importantly, with a switch multiple frames can be sent simultaneously (by different stations). These frames will 
reach the switch ports and travel over the switch’s backplane to be output on the proper ports. However, since two frames might be
sent to the same output port at the same time, the switch must have buffering so that it can temporarily queue an input frame until
it can be transmitted to the output port. Overall, these improvements give a large performance win that is not possible with a hub.
The total system throughput can often be increased by an order of magnitude, depending on the number of ports and traffic patterns.

The change in the ports on which frames are output also has security benefits. Most LAN interfaces have a promiscuous mode, in which
all frames are given to each computer, not just those addressed to it. With a hub, every computer that is attached can see the
traffic sent between all of the other computers. Spies and busybodies love this feature. With a switch, traffic is forwarded only 
to the ports where it is destined. This restriction provides better isolation so that traffic will not easily escape and fall into
the wrong hands. However, it is better to encrypt traffic if security is really needed.

//skip alle varie tipologie di ethernet con velocità mano a mano incrementali