So far in this book, we have looked at a variety of ways to get frames and packets from one computer to another. We have mentioned
repeaters, hubs, bridges, switches, routers, and gateways. All of these devices are in common use, but they all differ in subtle and
not-so-subtle ways. Since there are so many of them, it is probably worth taking a look at them together to see what the similarities
and differences are.

The key to understanding these devices is to realize that they operate in different layers. The layer matters because different
devices use different pieces of information to decide how to switch. In a typical scenario, the user generates some data to be sent
to a remote machine. Those data are passed to the transport layer, which then adds a header (for example, a TCP header) and passes
the resulting unit down to the network layer. The network layer adds its own header to form a network layer packet (e.g., an IP
packet).Then, the packet goes to the data link layer, which adds its own header and checksum (CRC) and gives the resulting frame to
the physical layer for transmission, for example, over a LAN.

Now let us look at the switching devices and see how they relate to the packets and frames. At the bottom, in the physical layer,
we find the REPEATERS. These are analog devices that work with signals on the cables to which they are connected. A signal appearing
on one cable is cleaned up, amplified, and put out on another cable. Repeaters do not understand frames, packets, or headers. They
understand the symbols that encode bits as volts. Classic Ethernet, for example, was designed to allow four repeaters that would
boost the signal to extend the maximum cable length from 500 meters to 2500 meters. 

Next we come to the HUBS. A hub has a number of input lines that it joins electrically. Frames arriving on any of the lines are sent
out on all the others. If two frames arrive at the same time, they will collide, just as on a coaxial cable (una huB è logicamente
uguale ad un lungo cavo condiviso dalle stazioni, serve solo a semplificare il wiring e notare più facilmente danni ad esso). All
the lines coming into a hub must operate at the same speed. Hubs differ from repeaters in that they do not (usually) amplify the
incoming signals and are designed for multiple input lines, but the differences are slight. Like repeaters, hubs are physical layer
devices that do not examine the link layer addresses or use them in any way.

Now let us move up to the data link layer, where we find BRIDGES and SWITCHES. We just studied bridges at some length. A bridge
connects two or more LANs. Like a hub, a modern bridge has multiple ports, usually enough for 4 to 48 input lines of a certain type.
Unlike in a hub, each port is isolated to be its own collision domain; if the port has a full-duplex point-to-point line, the
CSMA/CD algorithm is NOT needed. When a frame arrives, the bridge extracts the destination address from the frame header and looks
it up in a table to see where to send the frame. For Ethernet, this address is the 48-bit destination address (MAC). The bridge only
outputs the frame on the port where it is needed and can forward multiple frames at the same time.

Bridges offer much better performance than hubs, and the isolation between bridge ports also means that the input lines may run at 
different speeds, possibly even with different network types. A common example is a bridge with ports that connect to 10, 100, and
1000 Mbps Ethernet. Buffering within the bridge is needed to accept a frame on one port and transmit the frame out on a different
port. If frames come in faster than they can be retransmitted, the bridge may run out of buffer space and have to start discarding
frames. For example, if a gigabit Ethernet is pouring bits into a 10-Mbps Ethernet at top speed, the bridge will have to buffer them,
hoping not to run out of memory. This problem still exists even if all the ports run at the same speed because more than one port may
be sending frames to a given destination port.

Bridges were originally intended to be able to join different kinds of LANs, for example, an Ethernet and a Token Ring LAN. However,
this never worked well because of differences between the LANs. Two other areas where LANs can differ are security and quality of
service. Some LANs have link-layer encryption or have quality of service features such as priorities, for example 802.11 does, and
Ethernet does not. Consequently, when a frame must travel between these LANs, the security or quality of service expected by the
sender may not be able to be provided. For all of these reasons, modern bridges usually work for one network type, and routers,
which we will come to soon, are used instead to join networks of different types. 

Switches are modern bridges by another name. The differences are more to do with marketing than technical issues, but there are a
few points worth knowing. Bridges were developed when classic Ethernet was in use, so they tend to join relatively few LANs and thus
have relatively few ports. The term ‘‘switch’’ is more popular nowadays. Also, modern installations all use point-to-point links,
such as twisted-pair cables, so individual computers plug directly into a switch and thus the switch will tend to have many ports.
Finally, ‘‘switch’’ is also used as a general term. With a bridge, the functionality is clear. On the other hand, a switch may
refer to an Ethernet switch or a completely different kind of device that makes for- warding decisions, such as a telephone switch.

So far, we have seen repeaters and hubs, which are actually quite similar, as well as bridges and switches, which are even more
similar to each other. Now we move up to routers, which are different from all of the above. When a packet comes into a router, the
frame header and trailer are stripped off and the packet located in the frame’s payload field is passed to the routing software. This
software uses the packet header to choose an output line. For an IP packet, the packet header will contain a 32-bit (IPv4) or
128-bit (IPv6) address, but NOT a 48-bit IEEE 802 address. The routing software does not see the frame addresses and does not even
know whether the packet came in on a LAN or a point-to-point line.

//RICORDA
The device that makes a connection between two or more networks and provides the necessary translation, both in terms of hardware and
software, is a gateway. Gateways are distinguished by the layer at which they operate in the protocol hierarchy. Per esempio un router
è un Gateway dato che collega reti locali di tipo diverso.

Up another layer, we find TRANSPORT GATEWAYS. These connect two computers that use different connection-oriented transport protocols.
For example, suppose a computer using the connection-oriented TCP/IP protocol needs to talk to a computer using a different 
connection-oriented transport protocol called SCTP. The transport gateway can copy the packets from one connection to the other,
reformatting them as need be.

Finally, application gateways understand the format and contents of the data and can translate messages from one format to another.
An email gateway could translate Internet messages into SMS messages for mobile phones, for example. Like ‘‘switch,’’ ‘‘gateway’’ is
somewhat of a general term. It refers to a forwarding process that runs at a high layer.