In the early days of local area networking, thick yellow cables snaked through the cable ducts of many office buildings. Every computer
they passed was plugged in. No thought was given to which computer belonged on which LAN. All the people in adjacent offices were put on
the same LAN, whether they belonged together or not. Geography trumped corporate organization charts.

With the advent of twisted pair and hubs in the 1990s, all that changed. Buildings were rewired (at considerable expense) to rip out all
the yellow garden hoses and install twisted pairs from every office to central wiring closets at the end of each corridor or in a central
machine room, as illustrated in Fig. 4-38. If the Vice President in Charge of Wiring was a visionary, Category 5 twisted pairs were
installed; if he was a bean counter, the existing (Category 3) telephone wiring was used. 

Today, the cables have changed and hubs have become switches, but the wiring pattern is still the same. This pattern makes it possible
to configure LANs LOGICALLY rather than PHYSICALLY. For example, if a company wants k LANs, it could buy k switches. By carefully choosing
which connectors to plug into which switches, the occupants of a LAN can be chosen in a way that makes organizational sense, without too
much regard to geography. Does it matter who is on which LAN? After all, in nearly all organizations, all the LANs are interconnected. In
short, yes, it often matters. Network administrators like to group users on LANs to reflect the organizational structure rather than the
physical layout of the building, for a variety of reasons.

One issue is security. One LAN might host Web servers and other computers intended for public use. Another LAN might host computers 
containing the records of the Human Resources department that are not to be passed outside of the department. In such a situation,
putting all the computers on a single LAN and not letting any of the servers be accessed from off the LAN makes sense. Management tends
to frown when hearing that such an arrangement is impossible.

A second issue is load. Some LANs are more heavily used than others and it may be desirable to separate them. For example, if the folks
in research are running all kinds of nifty experiments that sometimes get out of hand and completely saturate their LAN, the folks in
management may not be enthusiastic about donating some of the capacity they were planning to use for videoconferencing to help out. Then
again, this might impress on management the need to install a faster network.

A third issue is broadcast traffic. Bridges broadcast traffic when the location of the destination is unknown, and upper-layer protocols
use broadcasting as well. For example, when a user wants to send a packet to an IP address x, how does it know which MAC address to put
in the frame? Briefly summarized, the answer is that it broadcasts a frame containing the question ‘‘who owns IP address x?’’ Then it
waits for an answer. As the number of computers in a LAN grows, so does the number of broadcasts. Each broadcast consumes more of the
LAN capacity than a regular frame because it is delivered to every computer on the LAN. By keeping LANs no larger than they need to be,
the impact of broadcast traffic is reduced.

Related to broadcasts is the problem that once in a while a network interface will break down or be misconfigured and begin generating an
endless stream of broadcast frames. If the network is really unlucky, some of these frames will elicit responses that lead to ever more
traffic. The result of this broadcast storm is that (1) the entire LAN capacity is occupied by these frames, and (2) all the machines
on all the interconnected LANs are crippled just processing and discarding all the frames being broadcast. At first it might appear that
broadcast storms could be limited in scope and reach by separating the LANs with bridges or switches, but if the goal is to achieve
transparency (i.e., a machine can be moved to a different LAN across the bridge without anyone noticing it), then bridges have to forward
broadcast frames.

Having seen why companies might want multiple LANs with restricted scopes, let us get back to the problem of decoupling the logical
topology from the physical topology. Building a physical topology to reflect the organizational structure can add work and cost, even
with centralized wiring and switches. For example, if two people in the same department work in different buildings, it may be easier to
wire them to different switches that are part of different LANs. Even if this is not the case, a user might be shifted within the company
from one department to another without changing offices, or might change offices without changing departments. This might result in the
user being on the wrong LAN until an administrator manually changed the user’s connector from one switch to another. Furthermore, the
number of computers that belong to different departments may not be a good match for the number of ports on switches; some departments
may be too small and others so big that they require multiple switches. This results in wasted switch ports that are not used. 

In many companies, organizational changes occur all the time, meaning that system administrators spend a lot of time pulling out plugs
and pushing them back in somewhere else. Also, in some cases, the change cannot be made at all because the twisted pair from the user’s
machine is too far from the correct switch (e.g., in the wrong building), or the available switch ports are on the wrong LAN. In response
to customer requests for more flexibility, network vendors began working on a way to rewire buildings entirely in software. The resulting
concept is called a VLAN (Virtual LAN). It has been standardized by the IEEE 802 committee and is now widely deployed in many
organizations. Let us now take a look at it.

VLANs are based on VLAN-aware switches. To set up a VLAN-based network, the network administrator decides how many VLANs there will be,
which computers will be on which VLAN, and what the VLANs will be called. As an example, consider the bridged LAN of Fig. 4-39, in which
nine of the machines belong to the G (gray) VLAN and five belong to the W (white) VLAN. Machines from the gray VLAN are spread across 
two switches, including two machines that connect to a switch via a hub.

To make the VLANs function correctly, configuration tables have to be set up in the bridges. These tables tell which VLANs are accessible
via which ports. When a frame comes in from, say, the gray VLAN, it must be forwarded on all the ports marked with a G. This holds for
ordinary (i.e., unicast) traffic for which the bridges have not learned the location of the destination, as well as for multicast and
broadcast traffic. Note that a port may be labeled with multiple VLAN.

As an example, suppose that one of the gray stations plugged into bridge B1 in Fig. 4-39 sends a frame to a destination that has not been
observed beforehand. Bridge B1 will receive the frame and see that it came from a machine on the gray VLAN, so it will flood the frame on
all ports labeled G (except the incoming port). The frame will be sent to the five other gray stations attached to B1 as well as over
the link from B1 to bridge B2. At bridge B2, the frame is similarly forwarded on all ports labeled G. This sends the frame to one further
station and the hub (which will transmit the frame to all of its stations). The hub has both labels because it connects to machines from
both VLANs. The frame is not sent on other ports without G in the label because the bridge knows that there are no machines on the gray
VLAN that can be reached via these ports.

In our example, the frame is only sent from bridge B1 to bridge B2 because there are machines on the gray VLAN that are connected to B2.
Looking at the white VLAN, we can see that the bridge B2 port that connects to bridge B1 is not labeled W. This means that a frame on the
white VLAN will not be forwarded from bridge B2 to bridge B1. This behavior is correct because no stations on the white VLAN are
connected to B1.