--- 802.11 ARCHITECTURE AND PROTOCOL STACK
802.11 networks can be used in two modes. The most popular mode is to connect clients, such as laptops and smartphones, to another
network, such as a company intranet or the Internet. In infrastructure mode, each client is associated with an AP (Access Point)
that is in turn connected to the other network. The client sends and receives its packets via the AP. Several access points may be
connected together, typically by a wired network called a distribution system, to form an extended 802.11 network. In this case,
clients can send frames to other clients via their APs.

The other mode is an ad hoc network . This mode is a collection of computers that are associated so that they can directly send
frames to each other. There is no access point. Since Internet access is the killer application for wireless, ad hoc networks are
not very popular.

Now we will look at the protocols. All the 802 protocols, including 802.11 and Ethernet, have a certain commonality of structure.
The stack is the same for clients and APs. The physical layer corresponds fairly well to the OSI physical layer, but the data link
layer in all the 802 protocols is split into two or more sublayers. In 802.11, the MAC sublayer determines how the channel is 
allocated, that is, who gets to transmit next. Above it is the Logical Link control Sublayer, whose job it is to hide the
differences between the different 802 variants (incluso Ethernet) and make them indistinguishable as far as the network layer is
concerned.

Several transmission techniques have been added to the physical layer as 802.11 has evolved since it first appeared in 1997. Queste 
definiscono le varianti dello standard 802.11. Ad esempio, transmission techniques based on the orthogonal frequency division
multiplexing includono: 802.11a (5 GHz frequency band), 802.11g (2.4 GHz). Transmission techniques that simultaneously use multiple
antennas at the transmitter and receiver (MIMO) for a speed boost were finalized as 802.11n. Una combinazione di queste due tecniche,
che permette larghezze di banda maggiori, è stata finalizzata in 802.11ac, most modern mobile devices use 802.11ac. Most recently, 
the 802.11ax standard was approved for even more speed. 

--- 802.11 PHYSICAL LAYER
Each of the transmission techniques makes it possible to send a MAC frame over the air from one station to another. They differ,
however, in the technology used and speeds achievable in practice.

All of the 802.11 techniques use short-range radios to transmit signals in either the 2.4-GHz or the 5-GHz ISM frequency bands.
These bands have the advantage of being unlicensed and hence freely available to any transmitter willing to meet some restrictions,
such as radiated power of at most 1 W (though 50 mW is more typical for wireless LAN radios). Unfortunately, this fact is also known
to the manufacturers of garage door openers, cordless phones, microwave ovens, and countless other devices, all of which compete with
laptops and smartphones using WiFi for the same spectrum. The 2.4-GHz band tends to be more crowded than the 5-GHz band, so 5 GHz
can be better for some applications even though it has shorter range due to the higher frequency. Unfortunately, the shorter radio
waves at 5 GHz do not penetrate walls as well as the longer ones at 2.4 GHz do, so 5 GHz is not the unquestioned champion.

All of the transmission methods also define multiple rates. The idea is that different rates can be used depending on the current
conditions. If the wireless signal is weak, a low rate can be used. If the signal is clear, the highest rate can be used. This
adjustment is called RATE ADAPTATION. Since the rates vary by a factor of 10 or more, good rate adaptation is important for good
performance. 

//skip dei delle specifiche varianti

--- 802.11 MAC SUBLAYER PROTOCOL
The 802.11 MAC sublayer protocol is quite different from that of Ethernet, due to two factors that are fundamental to wireless 
communication. First (problem), radios are nearly always half duplex, meaning that they cannot transmit and listen for noise bursts
at the same time on a single frequency. The received signal can easily be a million times weaker than the transmitted signal, so it
cannot be heard at the same time. With Ethernet, a station just waits until the ether goes silent and then starts transmitting. If 
it does not receive a noise burst back while transmitting the first 64 bytes, the frame has almost assuredly been delivered correctly
 (ricevuto si, correctly forse). With wireless, this collision detection mechanism does not work.

Instead, 802.11 tries to avoid collisions with a protocol called CSMA/CA. This protocol is conceptually similar to Ethernet’s 
CSMA/CD, with channel sensing before sending and exponential back off after collisions. However, a STATION (non un AP) that has a
frame to send starts with a random backoff (random number of time slots). It does NOT wait for a collision. The station waits until
the channel is idle, by sensing that there is no signal for a short period of time, and counts down idle slots, pausing when frames 
are sent. It sends its frame when the counter reaches 0. If the frame gets through, the destination immediately sends a short ack.
Lack of an acknowledgement is inferred to indicate an error, whether a collision or otherwise. In this case, the sender doubles the
backoff period and tries again, continuing with exponential backoff as in Ethernet until the frame has been successfully transmitted
or the maximum number of retransmissions has been reached. 

Compared to Ethernet, there are two main differences. First, starting backoffs early helps to avoid collisions (se tutte le stazioni
fossero eager di inviare mentre il canale è occupato -> collisione). This avoidance is worthwhile because collisions are expensive,
as the entire frame is transmitted even if one occurs. Second, acknowledgements are used to infer collisions because collisions
cannot be detected.

This mode of operation is called DCF (Distributed Coordination Function) because each station acts independently, without any kind
of central control. The standard also includes an optional additional mode of operation called PCF (Point Coordination Function) in
which the access point controls all activity in its cell, just like a cellular base station. However, PCF is not used in practice
because there is normally no way to prevent stations in another nearby network from transmitting competing traffic.

The second problem is that the transmission ranges of different stations may be different. With a wire, the system is engineered so
that all stations can hear each other. With the complexities of RF propagation, this situation does not hold for wireless stations.
Consequently, situations such as the hidden terminal problem mentioned earlier can arise. Since not all stations are within radio
range of each other, transmissions going on in one part of a cell may not be received elsewhere in the same cell. In this example,
station C is transmitting to station B. If A senses the channel, it will not hear anything and will falsely conclude that it may now
start transmitting to B. This decision leads to a collision.

The inverse situation is the exposed terminal problem. Here, B wants to send to C, so it listens to the channel. When it hears a
transmission, it falsely concludes that it may not send to C, even though A may in fact be transmitting to D. This decision wastes
a transmission opportunity. Si risolve con virtual channel sensing (NAV, RTS, CTS; //skip)

- STRATEGIE AGGIUNTIVE
CSMA/CA with physical and virtual sensing is the core of the 802.11 protocol. However, there are several other mechanisms that have
been developed to go with it. Each of these mechanisms was driven by the needs of real operation, so we will look at them briefly.

The first need we will take a look at is reliability. In contrast to wired networks, wireless networks are noisy and unreliable, in
no small part due to interference from other kinds of devices, such as microwave ovens, which also use the unlicensed ISM bands. The
use of acknowledgements and retransmissions is of little help if the probability of getting a frame through is small in the first
place. The main strategy that is used to increase successful transmissions is to LOWER the transmission rate. Slower rates use more
robust modulations that are more likely to be received correctly for a given signal-to-noise ratio. If too many frames are lost, a
station can lower the rate. If frames are delivered with little loss, a station can occasionally test a higher rate to see if it
should be used.

Another strategy to improve the chance of the frame getting through undamaged is to send shorter frames. If the probability of any
bit being in error is p, the probability of an n-bit frame being received entirely correctly is (1-p)^n. For example, for p=10^(-4),
the probability of receiving a full Ethernet frame (12,144 bits) correctly is less than 30%. Most frames will be lost. But if the
frames are only a third as long (4048 bits), two thirds of them will be received correctly. Now most frames will get through and
fewer retransmissions will be needed. Shorter frames can be implemented by reducing the maximum size of the message that is accepted
from the network layer. Alternatively, 802.11 allows frames to be split into smaller pieces, called FRAGMENTS, each with its own
checksum. The fragment size is not fixed by the standard, but is a parameter that can be adjusted by the AP. The fragments are
individually numbered and acknowledged using a stop-and-wait protocol (i.e., the sender may not transmit fragment k + 1 until it has
received the acknowledgement for fragment k). Once the channel has been acquired, multiple fragments are sent as a burst. They go
one after the other with an acknowledgement (and possibly retransmissions) in between, until either the whole frame has been
successfully sent or the transmission time reaches the maximum allowed. 

The second need we will discuss is SAVING POWER. Battery life is always an issue with mobile wireless devices. The 802.11 standard
pays attention to the issue of power management so that clients need not waste power when they have neither information to send nor
to receive. 

The basic mechanism for saving power builds on beacon frames . Beacons are periodic broadcasts by the AP (e.g., every 100 msec).
The frames advertise the presence of the AP to clients and carry system parameters, such as the identifier of the AP, the time, how
long until the next beacon, and security settings.

Clients can set a power-management bit in frames that they send to the AP to tell it that they are entering power-save mode. In this
mode, the client can doze and the AP will buffer traffic intended for it. To check for incoming traffic, the client wakes up for
every beacon, and checks a traffic map that is sent as part of the beacon. This map tells the client if there is buffered traffic.
If so, the client sends a poll message to the AP, which then sends the buffered traffic. The client can then go back to sleep until
the next beacon is sent. 

The third and last need we will examine is QUALITY OF SERVICE. When the VoIP traffic in the preceding example competes with
peer-to-peer traffic, the VoIP traffic will suffer. It will be delayed due to contention with the high-bandwidth peer-to- peer
traffic, even though the VoIP bandwidth is low. These delays are likely to degrade the voice calls. To prevent this degradation,
we would like to let the VoIP traffic go ahead of the peer-to-peer traffic, as it is of higher priority.

IEEE 802.11 has a clever mechanism to provide this kind of quality of service that was introduced as set of extensions under the
name 802.11e in 2005. It works by extending CSMA/CA with carefully defined intervals between frames. After a frame has been sent, a
certain amount of idle time is required before any station may send a frame to check that the channel is no longer in use. The trick
is to define different time intervals for different kinds of frames.

Five intervals are depicted in Fig. 4-28. The interval between regular data frames is called the DIFS (DCF InterFrame Spacing). Any
station may attempt to acquire the channel to send a new frame after the medium has been idle for DIFS. The usual contention rules
apply, and binary exponential backoff may be needed if a collision occurs. The shortest interval is SIFS (Short InterFrame
Spacing). It is used to allow the parties in a single dialog the chance to go first. Examples include letting the receiver send an
ACK, other control frame sequences like RTS and CTS, or letting a sender transmit a burst of fragments. Sending the next fragment
after waiting only SIFS is what prevents another station from jumping in with a frame in the middle of the exchange.

The two AIFS (Arbitration InterFrame Space ) intervals show examples of two different priority levels. The short interval, AIFS1, is
smaller than DIFS but longer than SIFS. It can be used by the AP to move voice or other high-priority traffic to the head of the 
line. The AP will wait for a shorter interval before it sends the voice traffic, and thus send it before regular traffic. The long
interval, AIFS4, is larger than DIFS. It is used for background traffic that can be deferred until after regular traffic. The AP 
will wait for a longer interval before it sends this traffic, giving regular traffic the opportunity to transmit first. The complete 
quality of service mechanism defines four different priority levels that have different backoff parameters as well as different idle
parameters.

// SKIP 802.11 FRAME STRUCTURE 

--- 802.11 SERVICES
The 802.11 standard defines the services that the clients, the access points, and the network connecting them must provide to be a
conformant wireless LAN. The 802.11 standard offers various services.

ASSOCIATION AND DATA DELIVERY
The association service is used by mobile stations to connect themselves to APs. Typically, it is used just after a station moves
within radio range of the AP. Upon arrival, the station learns the identity and capabilities of the AP, either from beacon frames or
by directly asking the AP. The capabilities include the data rates supported, security arrangements, power-saving capabilities,
quality of service support, and more. The AP’s beacon message also includes a SSID (Service Set IDentifier), which most people often
think of as the network name. The station sends a request to associate with the AP; the AP may accept or reject the request. While 
beacons are always broadcast, the SSID may or may not be broadcast. If the SSID is not broadcast, the station must somehow know
(or discover) the name to associate to that AP.

Reassociation lets a station change its preferred AP. This is useful for mobile stations moving from one AP to another AP in the
same extended 802.11 LAN, like a handover in the cellular network. If used correctly, no data will be lost as a consequence of the
handover. (But 802.11, like Ethernet, is a best-effort service). No delivery guarantees are given (pensa al numero limitato di
ritrasmissioni se non si riceve un ack).

Once frames reach the AP, the distribution service determines how to route them. If the destination is local to the AP, the frames
can be sent out directly over the air. Otherwise, they will have to be forwarded over the wired network. The integration service 
handles any translation that is needed for a frame to be sent outside the 802.11 LAN, or to arrive from outside the 802.11 LAN.
The common case here is connecting the wireless LAN to the Internet. 

Data transmission is what it is all about, so 802.11 naturally provides a data delivery service. This service lets stations transmit
and receive data using the protocols we described earlier in this chapter. Since 802.11 is modeled on Ethernet and transmission over
Ethernet is not guaranteed to be 100% reliable, transmission over 802.11 is not guaranteed to be reliable either. Higher layers must
deal with detecting and correcting errors.

SECURITY AND PRIVACY
Stations must also authenticate before they can send frames via the AP, but authentication is handled in different ways depending on
the choice of security scheme. If the 802.11 network is ‘‘open’’, anyone is allowed to use it. Otherwise, credentials are needed to
authenticate.

A common authentication approach, WPA2 (WiFi Protected Access 2), implements security as defined in the 802.11i standard. (WPA is an
interim scheme that implements a subset of 802.11i. We will skip it and go straight to the complete scheme.) With WPA2, the AP can
talk to an authentication server that has a username and password database to determine if the station is allowed to access the
network. Alternatively, a pre-shared key, which is a fancy name for a network password, may be configured. Several frames are 
exchanged between the station and the AP with a challenge and response that lets the station prove it has the right credentials.
This exchange happens after association.

Another authentication approach that is commonly used in enterprise networks is 802.1X, which implements an approach called
port-based authentication. 802.1X relies on centralized authentication (e.g., authentication of devices to a centralized server),
which creates the possibilities for more fine-grained access control, accounting, billing, and attribution. The station that is
authenticating is sometimes called a supplicant; this device authenticates to the network through an authenticator, which talks to
the authentication server. 802.1X relies on an authentication framework called EAP (Enhanced Authentication Protocol). The EAP
framework defines more than 50 different methods to perform authentication, but common methods include EAP-TLS, which performs
authentication based on certificates; EAP-TTLS and PEAP, which allow the client to associate using a variety of methods, including
password-based authentication; and EAP-SIM, whereby a mobile phone can authenticate using a SIM. 802.1X has many advantages over
simple WPA, such as the ability to perform fine-grained access control based on user, but it requires a certificate infrastructure 
to administer. 

The predecessor to WPA was called WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy). For this scheme, authentication with a preshared key happens before
association. WEP is now widely known to be insecure and is effectively no longer used. Software to crack WEP passwords is now freely
available.

With WEP broken and WPA deprecated, the next try was WPA2. It uses a privacy service that manages the details of encryption and
decryption. The encryption algorithm for WPA2 is based on AES (Advanced Encryption Standard). The keys that are used for encryption 
are determined during the authentication procedure. Unfortunately, WPA2 was broken in 2017 (Vanhoef and Piessens, 2017). Good
security is very hard, even with unbreakable crypto, because key management is the weakest link.