We saw in Chap. 2 that communication channels have a range of characteristics. Some channels, like optical fiber, have tiny error
rates so that transmission errors are a rare occurrence. But other channels, especially wireless links and aging local loops,
have error rates that are orders of magnitude larger. For these links, transmission errors are the norm. They cannot be avoided
at a reasonable expense or cost in terms of performance. The conclusion is that transmission errors are here to stay. We have to
learn how to deal with them.

Network designers have developed two basic strategies for dealing with errors. Both add redundant information to the data that
is sent. One strategy is to include enough redundant information to enable the receiver to be able to deduce what the transmitted
data must have been. The other is to include only enough redundancy to allow the receiver to deduce that an error has occurred
(but not which error) and have it request a retransmission. The former strategy uses error-correcting codes and the latter uses
error-detecting codes (The use of error-correcting codes is often referred to as FEC (Forward Error Correction)). Each of these
techniques occupies a different ecological niche.

On channels that are highly reliable, such as fiber, it is cheaper to use an error-detecting code and just retransmit the occasional
block found to be faulty. However, on channels such as wireless links that make many errors, it is better to add redundancy to each
block so that the receiver is able to figure out what the originally transmitted block was. FEC is used on noisy channels because
retransmissions are just as likely to be in error as the first transmission.

A key consideration for these codes is the type of errors that are likely to occur. Neither error-correcting codes nor
error-detecting codes can handle all possible errors since the redundant bits that offer protection are as likely to be received in
error as the data bits (which can compromise their protection). It would be nice if the channel treated redundant bits differently
than data bits, but it does not. They are all just bits to the channel. This means that to avoid undetected errors the code must
be strong enough to handle the expected errors.

One model is that errors are caused by extreme values of thermal noise that overwhelm the signal briefly and occasionally,
giving rise to isolated single-bit errors. Another model is that errors tend to come in bursts rather than singly.
This model follows from the physical processes that generate them—such as a deep fade on a wireless channel or transient electrical
interference on a wired channel. Both models matter in practice, and they have different trade-offs.

// SKIP DEI SPECIFICI ERROR CORRECTION E DETECTION CODES
