In this chapter, we will study the design principles for the second layer in our model, the data link layer. This study deals with
algorithms for achieving reliable, efficient communication of whole units of information called frames (rather than individual
bits, as in the physical layer) between two adjacent machines. By adjacent, we mean that the two machines are connected by
a communication channel that acts conceptually like a wire (e.g., a coaxial cable, telephone line, or wireless channel).
The essential property of a channel that makes it ‘‘wire-like’’ is that the bits are delivered in exactly the same order in which
they are sent.

At first you might think this problem is so trivial that there is nothing to study, machine A just puts the bits on the wire,
and machine B just takes them off. Unfortunately, communication channels make errors occasionally. Furthermore, they have only
a finite data rate, and there is a nonzero propagation delay between the time a bit is sent and the time it is received.
These limitations have important implications for the efficiency of the data transfer. The protocols used for communications
must take all of these factors into consideration. These protocols are the subject of this chapter. 

The data link layer uses the services of the physical layer below it to send and receive bits over (possibly unreliable)
communication channels that may lose data (a causa di rumore, distorsione, attenuazioni, collisioni, ecc.). It has a number of
functions, including:
    1. Providing a well-defined service interface to the network layer
    2. Framing sequences of bytes as self-contained segments.
    3. Detecting and correcting transmission errors.
    4. Regulating the flow of data so that slow receivers are not swamped by fast senders.
To accomplish these goals, the data link layer takes the packets it gets from the network layer and encapsulates them into FRAMES
for transmission. Each frame contains a frame header, a payload field for holding the packet, and a frame trailer.
Frame management forms the heart of what the data link layer does.