The strength of the OSI reference model is the model itself (minus the presentation and session layers), which has proven
to be exceptionally useful for discussing computer networks. In contrast, the strength of the TCP/IP reference model is
the protocols, which have been widely used for many years. Since computer scientists like to have their cake and eat it, too, we
will use an hybrid model as the framework for this book.

This model has five layers, running from the physical layer up through the link, network and transport layers to the application
layer.
    - The physical layer specifies how to transmit bits across different kinds of media as electrical (or other analog) signals.
    - The link layer is concerned with how to send finite-length messages between directly connected computers with specified
      levels of reliability. Ethernet and 802.11 are examples of link layer protocols.
      Broadcast networks have an issue in the data link layer: how to control access to the shared channel.
      A special sublayer of the data link layer, the medium access control sublayer, deals with this problem.
    - The network layer deals with how to combine multiple links into networks, and networks of networks, into internetworks
      so that we can send packets between distant computers. This includes the task of finding the path along which to send
      the packets. IP is the main example protocol we will study for this layer.
    - The transport layer strengthens the delivery guarantees of the Network layer, usually with increased reliability, and
      provide delivery abstractions, such as a reliable byte stream, that match the needs of different applications.
      TCP is an important example of a transport layer protocol.
    - Finally, the application layer contains programs that make use of the network. Many, but not all, networked applications
      have user interfaces, such as a Web browser. Our concern, however, is with the portion of the program that uses the
      network. This is the HTTP protocol in the case of the Web browser. There are also important support programs in the
      application layer, such as the DNS, that are used by many applications. These form the glue that makes the network function.