
DEF WAN e SUBNET
A WAN (Wide Area Network) spans a large geographical area, often a country or continent. We will begin our discussion with wired
WANs, using the example of a company with branch offices in different cities. 
    We will follow traditional usage and call client  machines hosts. The rest of the network that connects these hosts is then
called the communication SUBNET, or just subnet for short. The job of the subnet is to carry messages from host to host,
just as the telephone system carries words from speaker to listener. In most WANs, the subnet consists of two 
distinct components: transmission lines and switching elements (routers).
    A short comment about the term ‘‘subnet’’ is in order here. Originally, its only meaning was the collection of routers
and communication lines that moved packets from the source host to the destination host. Readers should be aware that it has
acquired a second, more recent meaning in conjunction with network addressing.
The WAN as we have described it looks similar to a large wired LAN, but there are some important differences:
    - Usually in a WAN, the hosts and subnet are owned and operated by different people.
    - A second difference is that the routers will usually connect different kinds of networking technology.
    - A final difference is in what is connected to the subnet. WANs connect entire LANs

Subnets, networks, and internetworks are often confused. The term ‘‘subnet’’ makes the most sense in the context of a WAN, where it refers
to the collection of routers and communication lines owned by the network operator.

DEF ISP
In a WAN variant, the subnet may be run by a different company. In our example, The subnet operator is known as a network
service provider and the offices are its customers. The subnet operator will connect to other customers too, as long as they can
pay and it can provide service.
    Since it would be a disappointing network service if the customers could only send packets to each other, the subnet operator will
also connect to other networks that are part of the Internet. Such a subnet operator is called an ISP (Internet Service Provider) 
and the subnet is an ISP Network. Its customers who connect to the ISP receive Internet service.