DEF
The the term ‘‘computer network’’ means a collection of interconnected, autonomous computing devices. Two computers are said
to be interconnected if they can EXCHANGE INFORMATION.
Interconnection can take place over a variety of transmission media including copper wire, fiber optic cable, and radio waves
(e.g., microwave, infrared, communication satellites). 
Networks come in many sizes, shapes, and forms, as we will explore throughout the book. 
They are usually connected to make larger networks, with the Internet being the most well-known example of a network of networks.

NB: dopo aggiunge questo dettaglio:  "collection of computers interconnected by a SINGLE TECNOLOGY"

DIFFERENZE CON SISTEMI DISTRIBUITI
There is considerable confusion in the literature between a computer network and a distributed system. The key distinction is that
in a distributed system, a collection of independent computers appears to its users as a SINGLE COHEREN SYSTEM. Usually, it has a single
model or paradigm that it presents to the users. Often a layer of software on top of the operating system, called middleware, is
responsible for implementing this model.

A well-known example of a distributed system is the World Wide Web. It runs on top of the Internet and presents a model in which everything
looks like a document (Web page). In a computer network, this coherence, model, and software are absent. Users are exposed to the actual
machines, without any attempt by the system to make the machines look and act in a coherent way. If the machines have different hardware
and different operating systems, that is fully visible to the users. If a user wants to run a program on a remote machine, he has to log onto
that machine and run it there.

In effect, a distributed system is a software system built on top of a network. The software gives it a high degree of cohesiveness
and transparency. Thus, the distinction between a network and a distributed system lies with the software, rather than with the hardware.
Nevertheless, there is considerable overlap between the two subjects. For example, both distributed systems and computer networks need
to move files around. The difference lies in who invokes the movement, the system or the user.